How can I even mind that?
I guess.
It's ridiculous for me to discuss the novel itself in any great detail.
It's my job, of course, to read it.
But undoubtedly, we will get into it.
But I guess, what advice would you give to a reader coming to Alice Walker for the first time?
Open-minded man.
Would you suggest that a reader read you chronologically?
Is it a corpus, in your view?
Well, it could be interesting, but I think they should just follow their own curiosity.
You know, some books are for you at a particular time, for the reader at a particular time, not necessarily forever.
And that's how I read.
I don't necessarily—if I fall in love with the writer, I will then read everything, starting at the beginning and going up to where I dived in.
But, you know, follow your curiosity, think about where you are and what you might learn, you know, what questions you have at the time that you encounter my work.
And for me, actually, books just fall off the shelf when I need them.
I love that.
That's a good way.
You mean in terms of books that you need to read?
They always come.
I'm just writing a piece right now about associative browsing.
It's a brand new phrase that I've run into.
I love to browse in libraries, but it is extraordinary.
how you can discover a book.
It's uncanny.
That's precisely the book that you're looking for, and you've never heard of it before, including the author.
The author is unknown to you, and the work is unknown, and it's precisely what you're looking for.
Well, actually, you know, libraries are like a giant I Ching.
I like that, too.
I'm writing a new book about libraries through history and of the future, so every time I get a new quote, I put it into the... Could you expand on that a little bit?
Well, it's just, you know, how the I Ching, I mean, I used to just religiously do the I Ching, you know, the way you're supposed to, you know, with the coins, and it works, you know, the I Ching is a magical book, and it works.
But now I realize that if I do it, because I often don't have time to do the whole procedure,
I just opened the book, and there it is.
So that's how books come.
Yeah.
I read a really wonderful interview of you, and actually your publisher furnished it in Ms.
Magazine.
Oh, Ms., uh-huh, yeah.
But I hadn't realized, but of course I should have, that how important reading was to you, even as a very little girl, I guess.
Oh, yes.
Oh, I loved it.
Were you an eclectic reader?
Oh, well, I read whatever came into our house, and not many books came into our house.
But the ones that came were really potent because we had, you know, there was a double volume old collection called Prose and Poetry, and it had all of the, you know, Hawthorne and Melville and everybody, you know, all the old classics.
And that was, that's the way they gave it to us.
And that was where I lived.
I lived in those volumes for a long time.
Okay.
And you were the youngest of eight siblings.
And were you a reading family?
Were you a family of readers?
Well, yes, but my parents were not very well educated, so their reading was most of the newspaper and the Bible and the catalogs and things like that.
They loved it.
They loved the magic of reading and insisted that all of us read.
And that was why they were so, I think, really happy to build a school for us.
I read that about the building of the school.
Isn't that incredible?
That's a wonderful story.
Oh, it's so wonderful.
I love it.
And in fact, there's a woman who's doing a biography of me, and I had protested.
And then my brother, who was a Bostonian who lived here, got leukemia and died.
And the year and a half of his life before his death, I realized that indeed I did need a biographer because
You know, people were dying all the time, and especially this brother who had all these stories.
And in fact, that story about my parents and the community building the school was one of the many stories that he contributed.
And there was a newspaper clip that we lost that had a photo of me at four years old and my brother who was, I guess, 14 or whatever.
And I'm sitting on the well.
You know, we've done a well.
They've done a well for this little school.
Priceless.
So, I don't know where I was going with that, but, you know, it was good for me.
I'd like to get straight.
Where did you get books for the school, I guess?
Well, unfortunately, but, you know, what do we do?
They were the cast-off books from the white school, which means that they were totally, you know, biased and not very good for the spirit, but they had all the
essential things.
You could still read them, and math was colorless and so forth.
But history was decidedly the white man's history, wasn't it?
Oh, the history was dreadful.
I remember... I'm sorry, go ahead.
Yeah, I remember that the illustrations for the black people, they just had a, you know, their idea of an African, you know, with some big lips and foul teeth and cooking some missionary in the pot.
I mean, it was just that literal.
The Indian was, you know, doing something, quote, savage, and, you know, I mean, it was just...
And then there they were, you know, they were... Do you know Charles Blockson?
Yes.
I wrote about Charles in my last book.
I wrote a book called The Gentle Madness.
It was about the bibliomania.
And Charles was one of my great principal characters.
I love him.
This is a man who had a guaranteed football contract in the 50s, right, with the New York Giants.
And I interviewed Lenny Moore, his good friend and roommate, and Lenny said,
A black kid today, you only get one chance, maybe.
Imagine giving up, in the 50s, a shot to be a pro player.
And the reason was, and Charles says, to be a black bibliophile.
Those are his words.
And the reason for that is that when he was a kid in school, he asked a teacher, how come there were never any black people in the history books?
And she said, Charles, black people have no history.
And that's kind of what makes me think of this as your recollection of
of your school in these books.
And he said, well, boy, if I have no history, then what were all those stories my grandfather was telling me about the underground railroad?
That's not history.
I had no idea that he had had this.
No, because now I think of his build, Charles Bloxham.
He certainly could have been.
Oh, he was known.
He was at Penn State.
His roommates were Rosie Greer and Lenny Moore.
He played on the same team.
He was a track star, and I tell the story in my book how he, and then he had all these great skills, and then one day they went to New York for a track beat, and while Rosie and Lenny were out checking out the women, he took the A train, and he says, I took the A train to Harlem and went to the Schaumburg Library and walked in, it gives me goose pimples, and he said, and as soon as I walked in, he said, I knew I wasn't alone.
And that was the model for him, was to build a kind of a Schaumburg collection, which, in fact, he did, which is now a temple.
And so he spent, you know, he devoted his life to putting together this library, which is what is now 80,000 volumes.
And I've seen kids, little kids, walk in because of the genealogy that come in to, and he starts explaining, you know, lineage and history, and you see these eyes.
Anyway, I'm sorry to go off on this tangent.
But how is he?
Have you seen him lately?
I just talked to him.
He called me last week.
He wrote his autobiography, which is being published, and he wants to send me a copy.
And I'll write a little review of it.
I'm happy to do it.
So I just talked to him last week.
He's fine.
He sounds great.
Send him my love and admiration.
I will indeed.
I absolutely will.
He has mentioned, you know, he has all of your, obviously everything that you've done in his library.
But to go back to the open-mindedness, why is open-mindedness particularly necessary in your work?
Well, because my worldview is so different from the one that most people in this culture have.
And, you know, if they would have a minute to think about it, it would be easy to see why that would be absolutely necessary.
There's no reason why my worldview should resemble, you know, people who are
at the material top of the culture, both racially and financially.
And I think gender is a factor, too.
And gender is a factor.
And so, rather than just get disgruntled, as people seem to get occasionally, open-mindedness would help allow for a certain spaciousness.
And saying, oh, this is a different world view.
You know, this is someone who doesn't see it the way that I do.
And then what does that mean?
What is it?
You know, you have to approach writers like me, I think, the way that you would approach other cultures.
Because it is, I do come from another culture.
I mean, even though I'm in this one.
So that's what I mean.
I'm sorry, what do you mean, come from another culture?
Could you define a culture?
Well, yes.
I come from a very distinctive southern black culture pre-integration in my formative years.
A culture that was still very much oral, very much devoted to music, very much still a community.
And a culture that actually believed that we could do whatever we set our minds and hearts to.
That was the message.
That was clear as anything.
There was no self-pitying about, you know, I listened to myself actually talking about, you know, being poor in a sense.
You know, poor like we didn't have what the white people had.
But honestly, I can't say that in my heart I felt poor.
Because there was the richness of the daily life.
Now you're writing out of that culture?
Well, it's my foundation.
It's my foundation, and then it connects me to Indigenous people, because I definitely feel very Indigenous.
I feel like my Native American ancestry, you know, married to my African ancestry, married to my European ancestry, means that I am Indigenous and unique to this continent in a way that very few people are.
And that's true of many, you know, um,
For this new novel, you created a people.
Why was that necessary?
Well, they needed to exist, and I also feel that they exist in me, and that I am a seed of that people, and a seed of that particular worldview, which is very different from the Judeo-Christian worldview that was imposed on people of color around the globe, and white people, too.
um and so i uh for my own spirit you know there's a one one of the people that i really love is black elk and his notion his people's notion actually is a very ancient notion is that if you have a vision of how it all hangs together your job is to manifest it so people can see it and if you don't do that then you lose the opportunity to expand
the vision of the collective.
And it's not a competitive vision.
He calls it the great vision, but it's your great vision.
It's not one that's greater than Susan's.
And I think that in creating these people, that's part of what I'm doing.
I'm saying that this is my vision of what can be, and what may already have been.
You're looking very amused.
No, no, I'm not.
I'm listening to you and actually thinking ahead to my next question.
I'm sorry.
What is your next question?
No, no, no.
That's the problem with these things, you know.
In the old days, I used to take very feverish notes, and of course, then you hung on every word, but now with the tape recorder.
Right, just let it go.
And it's so tiny, too.
Isn't that wonderful?
And it gets two hours, too.
It automatically reverses itself in the...
It's a little bit of this, yeah.
It's really great.
Oh, beautiful.
It's so small.
I'm not amused at all.
I hope I didn't.
I just smiled a lot.
Good.
Well, that's wonderful.
Yeah, I do, too.
I'm sorry.
Now I lost my track here.
This grew out of the creation of people.
This question, your response, grew out of my question.
And your previous response had described
a uniqueness for yourself.
I wonder why you couldn't have used this unique background of your own.
Or maybe you did in the creation of this people in Mexico.
Well, there's also the historical fact of all of these Africans, African Americans, and Native Americans from the United States who fled to Mexico.
I mean, that has happened, you know, over and over and over and over.
and before the Civil War, during the Civil War, and after the Civil War because, you know, people were looking for freedom, looking for land, looking for a place to be.
And I've always been fascinated by those people and by that notion of just walking away as soon as you could from a terrible situation and striking out for the unknown, but, you know, having a vision that there is something different and better.
This is the first novel in six years.
Have you been working on it for six years?
No, my last novel was Possessing the Secret of Joy, about female genital mutilation.
And then after that, I made a film about it.
And I then wrote a book with the filmmaker about making a film.
And we took the film all over this country, Europe, Africa.
I mean, not all over Africa, but places where we could.
show it.
And then I wrote another book called The Same River Twice, because I got really deeply interested in what having a film made from my book, A Color Purple, meant to me.
People always say, well, what do you think about, you know, the movie?
And it's actually, you know, the response would take a long time.
So you wrote a book about it.
Oh, I did.
And it really, you know... I'll have to check it out.
It was very helpful.
And I certainly, I know we've only got a brief amount of time here, so I don't want to... So the color purple is something that I'll write about, you know, from background.
Right.
But that is your, that response is in that book.
Oh, yeah.
That's what it's about.
But it's a very philosophical look at what happens when a creative person is sort of yanked out of the solitude of solitary creativity.
and plop down into the middle of a really large collective creative force, which is movie making.
Well, with the novel, you're totally in control.
It's yours.
Right.
There's a lot of letting go.
There's a lot of, you know, acceptance, and there's a lot of growth, because there's something about working with the collective that it helps you to
just start to feel all of your facets and your sides.
But creatively, how is it creatively?
I mean, I've never heard of a work of art being produced by a committee with the possible exception of the King James Bible, you know.
Well, it's not really a committee because a director like Steven Spielberg is, you know, in charge, totally.
And so it's more like beginning to be able to see the vision that you create
how to reflect it through somebody else's lens and learning to appreciate what they bring to it out of their own unique place in the world.
Do you have a, so clearly you've been a very busy woman over the past six years.
Maybe you could just tell me a little bit about the genesis of this novel.
Does it start with a story for you?
Because I think that you, the novel serves a lot of functions for you.
I mean, it's, to suggest that an Alice Walker novel is a, is a, is
Just a story, I think, is missing a point by a wide margin.
Well, it did start in Possessing the Secret of Joy, the earlier novel, because I realized that just the literal attack on female sexuality that I was encountering, that women have endured for maybe 6,000 years, where this practiced FGM is still going on,
I felt very much in need of a refreshment of my spirit, and I needed to affirm sexuality as a good, and the female body is alive and vibrant and positive, and sexuality as a vital, connected force to one's spiritual life.
So that's how it started.
This novel possessing The Secret of Joy, the truth of it is so heavy.
And of course, many people just outright denied it.
It was a long period when people said, oh, this doesn't happen.
And if it does happen, it only happens to ten people.
Why do you want to mention this anyway?
Because it's so hard.
People already think negative things about whoever.
Why is the form of the novel so important in this particular... I mean, you write in any number of different literary forms.
You're a non-fiction writer, you're an essayist, you're a poet, fiction writer.
What was there about fiction that made it appropriate in this particular case?
Fiction is absolutely so wonderful because it permits you to create an object, the novel, or the story.
And this object can exist
in a way that is distant from the reader.
I mean, it's not, you're not just saying, this happened to me, and you have to, you know.
It's basically saying, this is a work of art.
And you study it and feel it at your leisure.
And if you have a response, great.
And if you don't, fine.
You know, fiction is like that.
It really frees you.
And it also is the kind of thing that waits for you.
If you're not ready for a work of fiction, you know, at 16,
At 32, at 57, wait a few years, and it'll be there.
How important is story to you?
Very.
I come from a long line of storytellers.
I know that, you know, people can get bored.
I mean, I get bored myself.
That's why all of my novels are different.
And why chronology is not that appealing to me.
Well, certainly this novel life is pretty clear, too, I think.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
Yeah, it's more like circles for me, spirals.
It just feels more alive to me, and it also permits a very wonderful feeling of interconnectedness and growing with the book and growing with the understanding of the people.
And multiple narrative voices here.
That seems appropriate.
Oh, yeah.
It's like music.
People who read, actually, and live in our culture and have music in their lives, I think appreciate work that is challenging in that way.
It really is like music.
There's one chord, and then there's another chord.
And then you start to see how they play together.
And that appeals to me.
Do you have a sense of your reader when you're writing?
I mean, your constituency is legion and devoted to that.
Well, I always think of people with very lively minds and really engaged hearts, and people who really want to cultivate a certain amount of fearlessness.
Do you think your reader primarily is female?
Oh, my readership is, definitely.
But there are many, many more men now, and I'm very happy to see that.
Are they responding?
Do they feel less threatened?
Yes, because a lot of them by now have been raised by feminist mothers, and there is just not that same fear that they are about to be bashed.
And also by now many of them have seen me, met me, read me, and they see that we're on the same...
the same side, which is the side of life.
I normally don't ask writers to respond to reviews, and I'm not necessarily doing that here.
But, I mean, if I hadn't read the book, but if I were to go by, say, the New York Times review, and then the review that was in the Globe, I'd swear that they were writing about two different books.
Of course, one is written by a female, and the other is written by a male.
Can you explain why that is?
Why we're talking about two entirely different readings of the book?
I don't know, but you know what?
I don't read reviews until three months after, so I won't know until three months.
So you don't know what I'm talking about here?
No, no.
Just as well.
Yeah, I know, I know, I know.
That's what my agent told me.
And I can't say that, you know, that's unexpected, because everything I have written has been, you know, very much from my own point of view.
And, um, and not, you know, and very uncompromising.
And so I feel that, you know, lucky for me, I do have a very large readership that is very devoted and that is willing to try to see what I'm talking about.
And that's, you know, that's wonderful.
So you don't read reviews.
Is this to steel yourself against whatever?
Well, I read them about three months later.
So after the...
Well, it's because... That would be kind of fun, actually, to read them as a body, too, as opposed to one here and one there, and avoiding the highs and the lows.
Well, I just learned that over time.
I've been writing that for 30 years, and I've learned that, you know, it doesn't do a lot good to read them, especially when you're on the road, you know, you're tired, you're doing something every night, having interviews every day, you're away from your dog and your home and your food, and
You know, what good is it to?
What would, you know, certainly father is in the title.
Men are decidedly part of this book.
What would you say to somebody like me?
What would you hope that I, a 55-year-old father of two teenage daughters, would take away from this book?
Okay, great.
You're an ideal person.
The thought that father-daughter solidarity is the most evolutionary thing there is.
that you have the opportunity, by your relationship with your daughters, to change the world.
And if you can think of your daughters, when they reach puberty and enter young womanhood, as autonomous beings, whom you fully support in their autonomy, which is, first of all, complete control of their own bodies, if you can do this, and if fathers everywhere would do this, we would change the world.
It would be a different world.
And, of course, you say, and you point out, that you have these fathers who totally intend to deny their daughters the same joy and sexuality that, you know, we've certainly enjoyed.
Absolutely.
And even younger than my own kids are, you know.
I mean, they're 17 and 15, well, whatever.
But I see...
They're growing up for their women.
Absolutely.
Totally.
I mean, and it's so hypocritical to say, well, you know, it's all right for me, it's all right for boys, but it's not for you, and in fact, you don't even have those women, which is what, you know, millions of songs do everywhere.
And it's at that point, then, that the daughter is abused, frightened, you know, feels bad about her body, and it's just not necessary.
There's a quote, you say,
The spiritual growth and sexuality.
And then I wonder if I have those... I want you to just expand on that a little bit for me.
Okay.
Well, I fully believe that it is through the free expression of our sexuality that we gain self-knowledge.
I mean, obviously it's not the only place, but it's one of the major ones.
And that self-knowledge is enlightenment.
So to deny people the full expression of their sexuality...
is to deny them a major opportunity for self-knowledge and enlightenment, which is just the light of knowing who you are.
So it's not this dirty, furtive thing that has been pushed into the corner at all.
It's not this thing that has been demonized.
Instead, it is a major light.
Sexuality is a major light.
And that's why, you know, the church has been so hard on it.
I mean, the earlier, the church didn't even want marriage.
They didn't even, I don't know how far you studied it back there, but they were so against sex that they thought if you got married, it was bad.
You know, but then they figured out a way to control marriage and to be the official, you know, guardians of it.
And then, of course, okay, it didn't be okay if you married in our church.
But they, you know, they knew that it was
You know, it was a very big spiritual thing.
One other quick question that I had on with.
They told me half an hour.
The characters, you say, evolve from a state of grace, as a quote.
Yes.
As opposed to actually developing characters as characters.
Well, it's like, yeah, I mean, that seems to imply that the work of it is somehow not acknowledged.
That's not what I mean at all.
I work really hard.
I mean, I develop as much as anybody else.
But the work after a while is so intense, and it's done in such solitude in my case, that eventually they just start talking.
And so that's why it feels like grace.
And you hear their voices.
Well, yeah, they just, you know, they just, you know.
Why don't you do that now?
Do they have, and this is almost a cliche question, because you do talk, novelists do contend that their characters do assert themselves and determine where they're going.
Well, see, that's how you know that you have a live one.
If they don't do that, you know, I think you should just forget about them.
Put them away for five years.
So are you surprised then by where they go?
Do they surprise you?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, they do.
And that's the other part of it.
That's why it's worth writing.
Yeah, because they're not going to surprise me.
Why would they surprise you?
That's right.
Exactly.
You know, Manuelito is not hit by the bus, you know, and if I don't go, oh, no, why would you go, oh, no?
That's great.
I should point out that my background is Greek, by the way.
Really?
I'm going to Greece next week.
Oh, fabulous.
And then to Turkey and Egypt.
I'm working on an article for Smithsonian.
It's getting some stuff from my book, so...
I really enjoyed the Greek references.
So a week from today, I'll be in Turkey as well.
Amazing.
I've never been to Turkey.
Actually, I've been to emphasis, but I'm going to the great libraries through history, and then I'm going to go to St.
Catherine's Monastery in Sinai.
We're under one roof.
You have a church, a mosque, and a synagogue.
The only place on earth.
St.
Catherine's, huh?
Catherine's.
And there's a library there that's 1,500 years old.
There are actually books there that have been there.
It's in Egypt.
It's down in Sinai.
It's down in the Sinai, tip of the Sharm el-Sheikh I'm flying.
And then I'm going to have to spend five days with the monks on Mount Athos.
And I'm writing about that for Smithsonian.
So I'm going to have fun.
Would you kindly inscribe my book?
If you don't mind, I'll take it.